We're now going
to talk about how
to implement a wrapper for
the arbitrary error key method
allOf.
And this will be called
FuturesCollector.
And this is a way to
make the allOf method
palatable for mere
mortals to program with,
which is otherwise rather
complicated to deal with.
So if you recall, we
had alluded to this.
We'd foreshadowed this in
our previous discussion,
where we were showing
the test fraction
multiplications 1 method.
And I mentioned
to you that there
would be a stream of
CompletableFutures that
were connected to
asynchronous operations that
were running in the background.
And they were reducing
and multiplying
all these random big fractions.
And we wanted to use
Collect to convert
that stream of
completable futures
into one single complete future
that we could then weight upon,
using the thenAccept method.
And when everything was done, we
would sort and print the list.
So we're going to talk about
FuturesCollector, which
is how this is implemented.
FuturesCollector is just
a wrapper for allOf.
It converts a stream
of completable futures
into a single
completable future that's
triggered when all futures
in the stream complete.
And it's a
non-concurrent collector,
so it could be used for
both parallel and sequential
streams, although
I would strongly
recommend not combining
completable futures
with parallel streams.
That's probably overkill.
And I'm sure you also
remember that the Collector
interface was used
to accumulate input
elements into a mutable
result container.
We've talked about that in the
context of parallel streams
in previous weeks.
This class provides a
very powerful wrapper
for what would otherwise be
some unsightly and complex code.
And I think when you see
the implementation here
in a moment, you'll go, yep.
He's right about that.
So here's the FuturesCollector.
Now we ended up implementing
a custom collector
rather than trying to use
one of those factory methods
like Collector.of, because
this is complicated enough.
It really doesn't lend
itself to being shoehorned
into method references or
lambda expressions passed
as parameters to the Of
factor method on Collector.
The first parameter
to Collector,
which is the type of
element in the stream,
will be a completable
future to type T. So that's
what the stream
will be at, stream
of completable futures to type
T. The second element, which
is the mutable result
container type--
or the thing that's used
as the accumulator-- will
be a list of completable
futures to type T.
And the third and final
generic parameter to Collector
will be the return type of the
final output of the collector.
And in this case,
it's going to be what
is returned by the finisher.
And unlike all the
previous examples
we've looked at for
collectors, where we usually
returned like an array list, or
list or something, this time,
we're going to do something
really interesting.
We're going to return
a completable future
to a list of type T. Hm,
let's see how that works.
First, let's take a
look at the supplier.
The supplier is a
factory method that
returns a supplier that's
used by the streams collector
framework to create a new
mutable array list container.
So you can see in this case, the
supplier returns an array list
constructor reference.
And what that means
is we're going
to end up with a list of
completable futures to type
T stored in that array list.
We then define the accumulator.
And the accumulator
is a factory method
that returns a bi-consumer
that the Java streams collector
framework uses to
add new completable
futures into the mutable
array list container.
So every time a new
completable future comes along,
the accumulator will add
it to the end of the list,
as you can see by the fact
that we pass back List::add.
This method is only ever
called in a single thread.
So we don't need
to have any locks.
Here's the combiner.
This method is used if you're
working with a parallel stream,
and it's going to take a list of
completable futures of type T,
and another list of
completable features of type T
that were created by the
ForkJoinPool in separate tasks.
And it will add the second
one to the first one,
and return the first one.
So it's basically
combining by essentially
appending the lists together.
This method is only ever
called in a single thread,
so no locks are needed.
And finally, we get
to the finish method.
This is the crown jewels of
the futures collector class.
As you can see, it is going
to return a function that
will be used by the Java
streams collector framework
to transform the
array list mutable
result container into a single
completable future result type.
That's kind of
what that's saying.
So let's take a look
and see how this works.
This is really cool.
The first thing we get
here is the reference
to the mutable result
container, which, in this case,
is an array list
called futures--
that we call futures.
We take that futures
reference to an array list,
and we convert it to an array.
So we say, futures.toArray.
And we tell it it'll be an array
of completable future types.
And then we take that array
of completable futures, which
were really the copy of the
list of completable futures
we had before, and we pass
that to allOf arbitrary error T
method.
Sadly, allOf does
not take a list,
it takes an array,
which is so bizarre.
I don't know why they've
never fixed that.
But at any rate,
you pass in an array
of these things, which you
have to convert from the list.
The long and the
short of it is, allOf
takes that array of completable
futures, which in our case,
will all be running
in the background,
reducing, and
multiplying things.
And it returns a single
completable future
that will be triggered when all
the other completable futures
we just passed into
allOf complete.
So you can think of this
as basically some kind
of multiplex.
So we give it a bunch of things
and we get one thing back.
Now, when that single
completable future we got back
from allOf does, in fact,
trigger, this completion stage
method will get called.
And this completion stage
method, as you'll see,
is going to convert the
list of completable futures
that have just finished
running into their elements,
collect them into a list,
and then return that
as a completable future
to a list of elements that
just finished being processed.
So let's break that
down a little bit.
The first thing we do is we
take the array list of futures
and we turn it into
a stream of futures.
We then go ahead and take
that stream of futures--
completable futures--
and join them.
The calls to join
here will never block.
Why?
Because that apply
never would have
been called until all of the
completables futures passed
to allOf have
finished completing.
So by the time this joint
method reference is called,
we know all those
completable futures are done.
We then end up with
a stream of objects
of type T. We collect those
objects of type T into a list,
and then thenApply returns
a completable future
to a list of completed
elements of type T.
And so thenApply is actually
returning a completable future.
And so this is what it
looks like in context.
When Collect returns, it gives
us back a single completable
future to a whole pile
of completable futures
that are running
in the background.
And when those
things are done, that
will be converted by
the thenApply method
here, into a list of
completed objects--
or completed futures
list of objects--
at which point,
thenAccept is called.
And that will then go ahead
and sort and print the list.
So this is really,
really powerful.
And once again, it
demonstrates the virtue
of combining completable
futures with Java
streams, with Java lambda
expressions and method
references in order
to provide a very
powerful reactive programming
model that really gets us
to the pinnacle of what we can
do with completable futures
in the context of Java streams.
Just a few other little
loose ends to tie up.
Here is the
characteristics method
that returns that metadata
set that indicates
the characteristics of the
FuturesCollector collector.
And as you can see
here, we simply
return a singleton
unordered characteristic.
So we're just saying,
we don't care what
the ordering is for this thing.
We don't make this concurrent.
We definitely don't
do identity finish,
because we need the finisher to
actually do something useful.
The finisher is
really the part that
does the heavy lifting here.
And that's also
why we don't just
pass this as some
crazy lambda expression
into the of method
of collector of,
that it would just
be unwieldy to try
to figure out what's going on.
And then finally, we
have a factory method
that makes a new
FuturesCollector when
it's called.
So that kind of
plays the same role
as the toList factory method,
or the toSet factory method,
or the toMap factory
method on the Collectors
class, the utility class
that's defined as part
of the Java streams framework.
We kind of follow
the same model.